maintainers: document expectations (#250344)
NixOS/nixpkgs: maintainers/README.md

# Nixpkgs Maintainers

Unlike other packaging ecosystems, the maintainer doesn't have exclusive
control over the packages and modules they maintain. This more fluid approach
is one reason why we scale to so many packages.

## Definition and role of the maintainer

The main responsibility of a maintainer is to keep the packages they maintain
in a functioning state, and keep up with updates. In order to do that, they
are empowered to make decisions over the packages they maintain.

> By default, we expect committers to wait at least a week before merging

Reviewer: I would add a mention for packages that are not affected by the "one week" rule, that is:  "code owned" packages which have a large reverse dependency tree, e.g. systemd, LLVM, etc.

I don't think it's easy to put an amount of time, I'd state it as:

> Committers should reach out to the active code owners and discuss the timing for a potential merge, in the event where no active code owner can be reached in a reasonable amount of time (i.e. taking into account potential holidays), merge can be performed nevertheless with a provided rationale.

The idea is to:

(1) ensure that no stray committer merges a systemd change while not being in touch with active code owner of e.g. systemd which may have extra context on ongoing changes (internal information, etc.)

(2) ensure that abandoned "important dependencies" can be slowly picked up by new committers who will garden them and find a new maintenance story for them hopefully, e.g. LLVM

Tiny version bumps and security updates _could_ not be totally exception here, I don't have a strong opinion on that, I know that systemd security updates can lead to breakage, we had e2fs tooling's tiny version bumps breaking bootloaders (something something XFS), etc. It's a very hard problem in general.

Reviewer 2: > Tiny version bumps and security updates could not be totally exception here, I don't have a strong opinion on that, I know that systemd security updates can lead to breakage, we had e2fs tooling's tiny version bumps breaking bootloaders (something something XFS), etc. It's a very hard problem in general.

Would it make sense to make an exception for security updates / fixes earlier if e.g. the security team is involved as reviewer?

Generally I think that case of e.g. important bugfixes (e.g. $bump fixes data loss on runtime) or security fixes it should be possible for a committer to decide on a case-by-case basis what's best. @RaitoBezarius has brought some great examples on why I doubt that it's possible to find a general rule for this.

Also, such a ruling would exclude all those cases where the sole motivation of a person not maintaining the package in question is e.g. "wants to have the latest version available, immediately".

Reviewer 3: Agreed with @RaitoBezarius on specifying timing, or rather pushing that responsibility to maintainers themselves. Maybe we could establish a convention where maintainers are supposed to communicate what they can deal with.

But in general, why would random people merge code owned by others at all?

Author: Can you look at c67b737cd4d81303dc9cdaeb6f7b6f4be42a2ae7 and tell me if that is good enough? I'm keeping the text short so people are more likely to read it. And therefor try to not overload with exceptions.

Reviewer: Interesting point @ architectures they are willing to maintain.

Reviewer: I opened https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/251008 for exploring the question, feel free to carry the conversation there.

changes on packages they are not maintaining. This should leave enough time
for the maintainers to provide feedback. The only exception would be for tiny
version bumps and security updates that could be merged faster.

In case of conflict, the maintainer takes priority and is allowed to revert
the changes. This can happen for example if the maintainer was on holiday.

### How to become a maintainer

We encourage people who care about a package to assign themselves as a
maintainer. You don't require to have nixpkgs commit access to do so.

In order to do so, add yourself to the
[`maintainer-list.nix`](./maintainer-list.nix), and then to the desired
package's `meta.maintainers` list, and send a PR with the changes.

### How to lose maintainer status

Maintainers that have become inactive on a given package can be removed. This
helps us keep an accurate view of what parts of nixpkgs are well maintained or
not.

The inactivity measure is currently not strictly enforced. We would typically
look at it if we notice that the author hasn't reacted to package-related

> notifications for more than 3 months.

Reviewer 2: I assume that "no reaction at all" is meant here, correct? I.e. this isn't done on a per-package basis (otherwise one could lose the status if a fellow maintainer is always faster and you don't have anything to add most of the time).

When I first read this paragraph, I wasn't sure, so perhaps this should be rephrased a bit to make this clearer.

Also, we'd to give people who are about to lose their status a heads-up, correct? I  guess this should be mentioned here as well :)

Author: Removing a maintainer requires making a PR so that that person would be notified. But I'll add a paragraph for that.

I still think the test should be per package. Some people are active in some areas of nixpkgs, and have abandoned other parts that they don't care about anymore.

Worst case you can react on the removal PR.

Author: 10e3f2c7df0c50f47bdbb3029d475642c77b1246

# Nixpkgs Maintainers

Unlike other packaging ecosystems, the maintainer doesn't have exclusive
control over the packages and modules they maintain. This more fluid approach
is one reason why we scale to so many packages.

## Definition and role of the maintainer

The main responsibility of a maintainer is to keep the packages they maintain
in a functioning state, and keep up with updates. In order to do that, they
are empowered to make decisions over the packages they maintain.

By default, we expect committers to wait at least a week before merging

> changes on packages they are not maintaining. This should leave enough time

Author: Can you expand on what you mean? I'm not sure to understand

> changes on packages they are not maintaining. This should leave enough time

Reviewer 4: «By default, we expect committers to wait at least a week before merging changes on packages they are not maintaining.» — however, we do not currently wait to give _all_ maintainers time to comment, if one non-committer maintainer asks to merge, this is currently supposed to be good enough when the committer also likes the change.

> changes on packages they are not maintaining. This should leave enough time

Author: I also realize we don't describe how conflict resolution happens in case multiple maintainers of the same package disagree.

# Nixpkgs Maintainers

Unlike other packaging ecosystems, the maintainer doesn't have exclusive
control over the packages and modules they maintain. This more fluid approach
is one reason why we scale to so many packages.

## Definition and role of the maintainer

The main responsibility of a maintainer is to keep the packages they maintain
in a functioning state, and keep up with updates. In order to do that, they
are empowered to make decisions over the packages they maintain.

That being said, the maintainer is not alone proposing changes to the
packages. Anybody (both bots and humans) can send PRs to bump or tweak the
package.

We also allow other non-maintainer committers to merge changes to the package,
provided enough time and priority has been given to the maintainer.

For most packages, we expect committers to wait at least a week before merging
changes not endorsed by a package maintainer (which may be themselves). This should leave enough time

> for the maintainers to provide feedback.

Reviewer 5: That is not true for all subsystems. For example the python subsystem is regularly ignoring this on purpose to keep a healthy ecosystem. I am not sure how this alignes with this now.

Reviewer: Can you please be clearer about what you mean by this? e.g. Python committers merging bump < 1week because we want to keep up-to-date packages? I do not see why a 1-week wait could not be honored. 

It would just create a 1-week lag, which is not a big deal IMHO.

Reviewer 4: > ignoring this on purpose to keep a healthy ecosystem

Can this be described as «python team considers selves as comaintainers of all the packages inside `python-packages.nix`»?

> It would just create a 1-week lag, which is not a big deal IMHO.

Adding a 1-week lag to a process that works without it needs a good justification why the process will start working better afterwards…

Reviewer: > Adding a 1-week lag to a process that works without it needs a good justification why the process will start working better afterwards…

Well, it all boils down again to the position of the package in the dependency tree, some folks do not take this into account and just go on a happy merge spree, some cares about, etc.

Either case, @mweinelt has probably good opinions on that and I trust their judgement on those questions.

Reviewer: BTW,

> Can this be described as «python team considers selves as comaintainers of all the packages inside python-packages.nix»?

Yes, it would be good to ask the opinion of the Python team before writing something they may not agree about. :)

cc @FRidh @jonringer @tjni

Reviewer 6: The python ecosystem only ever carries one* specific version for each package, so we often have to touch many packages, to keep everything working. I would guess that only 10% of all 6000+ python packages have active maintainers, so bulk updates have become a requirement for a healthy package set. Ultimately this situation led to a few very active maintainers essentially co-maintaining most of the package set.

<sup>* yes, there are exceptions, but they're exactly that<sup>

Reviewer 7: We definitely don't optimize for giving maintainers a chance to respond, because the definition of maintainer for most Python packages has been: "I added the package, I might be interested in keeping it up to date, and I might be able to help answer some questions about it."

Reviewer: Either case, the mentioned sentence is "for most packages", I would argue: we should get this in and refine it for Python ecosystems and similar ecosystems.

Author: Let's keep this in mind for after the PR is merged. We need a better mechanism for maintainers to communicate those expectations.

> For critical packages, this convention needs to be negociated with the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
For critical packages, this convention needs to be negotiated with the
```

maintainer. A critical package is one that causes mass-rebuild, or where an
author is listed in the [`CODEOWNERS`](../.github/CODEOWNERS) file.

In case of critical security updates, the [security team](https://nixos.org/community/teams/security) might override these
heuristics in order to get the fixes in as fast as possible.

In case of conflict, the maintainer takes priority and is allowed to revert
the changes. This can happen for example if the maintainer was on holiday.

### How to become a maintainer

We encourage people who care about a package to assign themselves as a
maintainer. Commit access to the Nixpkgs repository is not required for that.

In order to do so, add yourself to the
[`maintainer-list.nix`](./maintainer-list.nix), and then to the desired

> package's `meta.maintainers` list, and send a PR with the changes.

Reviewer 9: While reviewing #250527, I noticed the advice for creating a separate commit for `maintainers` is neither documented in Contributing nor Maintainers files

https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/250527#issuecomment-1693276228

Should we include it here?

Reviewer 10: There was another PR by @matthiasbeyer adding that IIRC

### How to lose maintainer status

Maintainers who have become inactive on a given package can be removed. This
helps us keep an accurate view of the state of maintenance in Nixpkgs.

The inactivity measure is currently not strictly enforced. We would typically
look at it if we notice that the author hasn't reacted to package-related
notifications for more than 3 months.

Removing the maintainer happens by making a PR on the package, adding that
person as a reviewer, and then waiting a week for a reaction.

The maintainer is welcome to come back at any time.

### Tools for maintainers

When a pull request is made against a package, OfBorg will notify the

> appropriate maintainer(s).

Reviewer 5: * that currently does not work all the time and has edge cases where it breaks which is unfortunate

Reviewer: It's not a big deal, this is a OfBorg bug.

# Nixpkgs Maintainers

Unlike other packaging ecosystems, the maintainer doesn't have exclusive
control over the packages and modules they maintain. This more fluid approach
is one reason why we scale to so many packages.

## Definition and role of the maintainer

The main responsibility of a maintainer is to keep the packages they maintain
in a functioning state, and keep up with updates. In order to do that, they
are empowered to make decisions over the packages they maintain.

That being said, the maintainer is not alone proposing changes to the
packages. Anybody (both bots and humans) can send PRs to bump or tweak the
package.

We also allow other non-maintainer committers to merge changes to the package,
provided enough time and priority has been given to the maintainer.

For most packages, we expect committers to wait at least a week before merging

> changes on packages they are not maintaining. This should leave enough time

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
changes not endorsed by a package maintainer (which may be themselves). This should leave enough time
```

> changes not endorsed by a package maintainer (which may be themselves). This should leave enough time

Reviewer 11: Does that mean the endorsement of one maintainer is enough? What if a package has multiple maintainers? What if they disagree?

Author: I don't know if I'm ready to open that rabbit hole. For now, I suggest leaving that unspecified.

Reviewer: IMHO, conflict resolution is 2 or 3 magnitudes harder than anything those PRs are doing so far, I would +1 not going into that rabbit hole.

Reviewer 4: I think putting a specific duration on «wait for some maintainer reaction» is good, and everything further is reliant on judgement calls that are hard to predefine. We don't ask to definitely merge once there is a single maintainer approval, after all!

Reviewer 11: Alright, then lets postpone this. It's just something I'm regularly asking myself when trying to decide if I should just merge something or if maybe I should wait.

Reviewer 4: I guess for me the correct question will now be «will I be sincere or hypocritical saying ‘Sorry, after a single maintainer approval I did not understand this is going to be controversial’?».

Reviewer 5: Can we have some tooling to get reminded of that time?

Reviewer: I do not want to be mean, but calendars are pretty good for this.

Reviewer 4: (Actually, no, they are not, for _multiple_ reasons: they are hard to set up to get exactly the relevant notifications for this batch when you cut out some time to look at Nixpkgs, and most of them don't integrate well enough with browsing the pull request. On the other hand, an option for CI re-requesting reviews in case there is a check you want to let finish is useful in any case, and if it exists, maybe remind-me-in-a-week would be doable on top of that)

Author: I agree; we need some more tooling for this.

for the maintainers to provide feedback.

For critical packages, this convention needs to be negociated with the
maintainer. A critical package is one that causes mass-rebuild, or where an

> author is listed in the CODEOWNERS file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
author is listed in the [`CODEOWNERS`](../.github/CODEOWNERS) file.
```

> In case of critical security updates, the security team might override these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In case of critical security updates, the [security team](https://nixos.org/community/teams/security) might override these
```

heuristics in order to get the fixes in as fast as possible.

In case of conflict, the maintainer takes priority and is allowed to revert
the changes. This can happen for example if the maintainer was on holiday.

### How to become a maintainer

We encourage people who care about a package to assign themselves as a

> maintainer. You don't require to have nixpkgs commit access to do so.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
maintainer. Commit access to the Nixpkgs repository is not required for that.
```

In order to do so, add yourself to the
[`maintainer-list.nix`](./maintainer-list.nix), and then to the desired
package's `meta.maintainers` list, and send a PR with the changes.

### How to lose maintainer status

> Maintainers that have become inactive on a given package can be removed. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Maintainers who have become inactive on a given package can be removed. This
```

> helps us keep an accurate view of what parts of nixpkgs are well maintained or
> not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
helps us keep an accurate view of the state of maintenance in Nixpkgs.
```
